---
title: Is it worth it?
date: 2013-07-16
synopsis: Sacrificing everything for your future, in terms of heavy elementary and middle school education, is it worth it?
run-in: Sacrificing everything
---

Sacrificing everything for your future, in terms of heavy elementary and middle school education, is it worth it?

![(Is it worth it? (Man in Maze)](/images/is-it-worth-it.jpg)
[source](http://www.freeimages.com/photo/1008266)

Before coming to Canada, I used to live in Iran, where the education
system works quite differently than it does here. In Iran, high school
students don’t get to choose their courses: the first year of high
school is general and the courses are the same for everyone. In second
year and higher, students have 3 subjects to choose from:

- Mathematics,
- Science, and
- Social Sciences.

Choosing a subject, the student will be given a fixed time table for
the next 3 years of high school. In fact, students in any of the
subjects study almost the same courses, except they will receive a
thorough education in their subject of choice. But they all have to
take courses such as Persian Grammar, Arabic, English, History,
Geography, etc.

It doesn't end here. Before entering university, all students have to
participate in a country-wide exam which consists of more than 200
multiple choice questions that have to be answered all in less than 4
hours. As you can guess, it’s almost _impossible_ to have a good
future without doing lots of study in that education
system. Therefore, for us students, it’s not a choice of whether it's
worth it or not: either we do study that much and we _might_ become
successful, or otherwise the chances of succeeding are are less than
1%.

But, for parents all around the world that live in a country
with much more open and easier education system, given the choice, do
you think it’s worth it for your child to put them through extensive
education before they reach university or even high school?

Well, let me offer my opinion: __No__. It’s not worth it. Why? Here
are my reasons. I experienced what it’s like to be in that type of
education system, as I lived in Iran for the first 16 years of my
life. It was like never ending pain. I had to quit playing music, my
karate class and stop enjoying my hobbies when I was only 12 years
old. Yes, that doesn’t sound like fun; and trust me it wasn't. Each
day I had to wake up at 6 and go to school and study the hardest
materials one can find, only in middle school and high school. To some
extent, anyone would enjoy studying. I’m that type of person. In fact
I love it. But when it gets to a point where a 12 year old child has
to study about 4 hours everyday to pass their courses, I don’t think
it’d be delicate anymore. The one and half year that I’ve been here in
Canada, I hardly saw any senior _high school_ student study more than
2 hours a day.

You might argue, well, not everyone has to go to university to make a
living because there are lots of other opportunities outside. Well,
you are partly right. In developed countries that’s true; one can
easily find a job right after finishing high school or college; but
it’s quite different in developing countries. In those countries,
people with _bachelors_ and _masters_ can hardly find jobs. I think
you can see where this is going, and you’re right: if that’s the case,
there’s basically no chance what so ever that a high school graduate
will be able to find work.

So, in those countries for most people in most subjects, university
education is the only way to go. Which brings about all the issues I
discussed and the tedious preparation that has to be done.

In conclusion, I hope you’ve gained some insight about education in
another part of the world and hopefully learned something new. If you
are a parent, or a person in charge, try to consider children and
students, and their childhood, before making decisions about their
education. They are only kids, let them have a good childhood, not one
that’s ruined by the pressure of different courses and studies.

- - -

If this article made an influence, please share it with the hope of
more people getting to know what life is like for any child or young
person that’s forced to do lots of studies, without having any other
choice to build their future. I’m looking forward to hearing from any
of you who spent time and read my article.
